This is Frank Toback. Tonight I'm at the home of
John Groff in San Antonio, Texas. The date is
August 20th, 1984. I'd like to start off this
interview with just a little bit of background
information on you as far as where you were born and
when. I was born in Ryan Park, Wyoming, which was a
ranger station at the time.
April
4, 1941.
When my father joined the Army Air Corps in the
Second World War,
my family moved to Montrose, Colorado after the
war, and then the rest of the I—all my schooling was
in Colorado, in Leadville, Durango, and I went to
college at Western State College of Colorado. How
old were you when you all moved to Montrose? I think
I was eighteen months old. Oh, so you were just a
baby then. Yes.
What did your father's occupation in Colorado— He
was a forest ranger, graduate of the University of
Oregon
with B.S. in forestry. What about your mother?
What was she like? She was a school teacher. My
parents got married, I believe, in Delta,
Colorado. When she was teaching school, my father
was foreshadowing today. Were you all religious
at all? No, not very much. Well, where did you go to
college again? Western State of Colorado, which
is at Gunnison, Colorado. one of the cold spots in
the country. What made you decide to join the Army?
It was right during the Cuban Missile Crisis,
which was in October of 1962 and I joined in
November.
Actually it came about that I wasn't—I had three
years of college and I wasn't worried progressing
very well and so I decided to lay out a year and I was
going to take a trip around the world. And I was
going to try to get down to Australia and work for a
year there and then continue on.
to work in Australia you have to be a citizen or
apply for citizenship and I didn't want to give up
my American citizenship so that sort of went by the
wayside. At the time I was a smokejumper for the
Forest Service up in the state of Washington. What
were your duties as far as that? What was that,
smokejumping? We fought forest fires and the way
we fought forest fires was jumping out of
airplanes and landing by parachute and fight
forest fires. And it was a very good paying job and
first year I was a smokejumper. I made enough money
to buy a new car and put me through a year of school.
That's cool. So it was a good summertime job. Yeah,
sure. It was a lot of work, but. Yeah, it's a little
worth it. I'd like to talk a little bit about your
military training. When you first joined the
Army, where were you located? Where did you first
locate here at? My basic training was at Fort Ord,
California, and then I went through advanced
individual training there also in
communications.
How long was the boot camp last?
I really don't remember, I guess it was about three
months. What was it like? Just an ordinary boot
camp? I had a friend from Montana. We used to get up
before revelry and run four or five miles before
Reveille. We got caught doing it. They wanted to
know why—we weren't supposed to be out of the
barracks at that time—so they wanted to know why
and we told them we weren't getting enough
exercise and basic training. It didn't make them
very happy. When did you decide to join the Special
Forces? Well, when I enlisted it was my idea to join
the forces. a consideration—well,
they couldn't guarantee me being in the forces,
but they could guarantee me on my enlistment if I
didn't make jump school, my enlistment was void
then.
And after I got through my individual training, I
went to Fort Gordon, Georgia and went through jump
school there. When I was at Fort Ord they put me
through the barrier of tests for the special
forces which I passed very highly.
In fact, I had the highest test score that they ever
saw.
They called me in to find out why I made such a high
test.
The testing was sort of interesting. What they
would do is they would give you about anywhere from
fifteen to forty-five minutes of tape recording
of a situation and then you had to answer questions
in say like oral questions that they gave you and
you had five choices here was excellent good fair
bad or well was five choices like that and and they
were asked a question with an answer and then you
had to put down how you rated it and Total score,
maximum score of the test was six hundred, and at
that time you had to have three hundred to pass it,
and I made over five hundred and fifty on the test.
Fantastic. So I think it was the first time that
anybody ever broke five hundred, so they really
pumped me, and it was basically quick critical
decision test. In other words, the questions came
to you so fast you had to make a critical decision
very fast, this is what they want. So spontaneous.
Yeah. Why did you decide to become a medic?
It seemed like it had the most interest to it. I
always Well, when I grew up, the way I grew up was
sort of old fashioned. You always helped your
neighbor and you always, if somebody needed help,
you always helped them out. So, I figured I could be
the most help this way. Were there any medics, out
of the medics, were there any of them
conscientious objectors. Did you ever run across
any? No. How were—in your military training, did
they prepare you at all for the type of warfare that
you would see in Vietnam? Very good. Very good.
I had about two and a half years training before I
went over there, and my medical training was at
the degree where—they said we were equal to a
doctor twenty years before—was how much training
we had. We were able to do surgery, diagnose,
prescribe medicine, which we did do very much.
Now, in the war, When you went to Vietnam, when and
what year did you go and where did you arrive in
Vietnam at? I went over with Fifth Special Forces,
which was the first permanently assigned unit in
Vietnam, which our tour agility was one year.
always before. Normally when somebody went over
to Vietnam they went over on what they called a
temporary duty station, which could be up to six
months.
And they moved the whole group, which was sort of
unusual, was over to Vietnam and the fifth stayed
there They started going over in 1964 and was
completed probably in 1964 or 1965. The whole
group was there and they stayed there until
probably about 1978, I believe it was. When you
were first going over to Vietnam, what did you see
as America's role there in Vietnam? A way I saw the
role of the Special Forces was mainly as a teacher.
Officially, our assignment
was to
recruit local people,
train them, arm them, and advise them on military
and other matters in their area. And this not only
took in Vietnam, but all of Southeast Asia.
And we often went into, a lot of the teams went into
what is called the mountain yard areas. and they
had very good results with most of the mountain
yards. What were the mountain yards? The mountain
yards in Southeast Asia was equal to our American
Indians.
They lived in
Vietnam for hundreds of years, and they were
probably the only—the most native people, like
our American Indians was in the Americas, to
Southeast Asia. And they were fierce,
independent, small tribes, and most of them never
got conquered by the
people who conquered that land for several
thousands of years and they were mainly like our
American Indians, hunters, wanted to keep their
own religion and society isolated in mountain
areas and they just didn't like to fool with them.
What were your immediate thoughts when you first
got in country? Well, we landed in Saigon. We flew
over from North Carolina to Saigon and
I couldn't believe the mass of people in Saigon or
the smell. What was that like? If you've ever been
in a smelly part of Mexico, you know.
You know, open sewers and garbage out in the street
and everything else. Not real pleasant. No.
How long did you stay in Saigon?
just a few days, and then we went up to the Special
Forces, the 5th Headquarters, which was in Nha
Trang, and there we got our assignment. We were
previously assigned, and the area we were
supposed to go into was
at the corner of Vietnam, Cambodia, and And we were
supposed to go in and recruit the mountain yard
tribe by name of Jew, J-E-W,
which were discounted by the other mountain yards
as the savages, which you would compare to the, I
guess, the Apaches of American Indians.
After we got there we got another assignment as
usual in the Army and instead of going in that area
we went about three hundred miles south in the
Mekong Delta.
Did you ever have any dealings with our ARVN
troops? Yes. What was your opinion of
them? We had the highest camp in Fourth Corps,
which was the Mekong Delta, and we had the first
airborne ranger company of the Vietnese troops,
and they were top notch. They were really good, and
they were probably one of the oldest units in the
Vietnam Army, and they were excellent fighters.
What was the age of the average Arden soldier? The
age of their varied greatly. In fact, as I was
saying before our interview started that there
was three of them that were veterans of the Battle
of Bindinfu and on both sides. So they had
experience? Yes, very much.
They were very good fighters. They were good as any
American's troops on the whole I would say. What
was your feelings as far as the South Vietnamese
people? Did you feel that they really wanted to win
their war? Were they really dedicated to this
cause? I feel like the South Vietnamese people on
the whole They just wanted to have peace and be able
to live and have a family, just like we do today.
There's no difference. The area I was in was wild
rice. In other words, when the Mekong River
flooded during the monsoons, it covered the
ground and they planted their rice. And then they
harvested, and there was no dikes or anything like
that. And of course, all the land was owned by
absentee landlords, which probably never saw the
land. And I would say the average income of the
farmer there was probably ten, twelve dollars a
year in American money. So they were extremely
poor. But then you have to understand that this was
in the tropics and about the only thing they would
raise most of their fruits and vegetables or pick
them wild and raise some chickens and hogs. This
was self-sufficient. Yes, very much like our
frontier farmer.
How was your feelings towards the Viet Cong and the
North Vietnamese Army in comparison to— I didn't
have much contact with the North Vietnamese Army
because they didn't really come down there in full
strength, but the Viet Cong that were in our area
were very poorly equipped and as far as weapons go
and so on and they were—just
the political arm was well organized. Their units
were not very well organized and
when we ran into it we generally always had a better
hand. saying
this too that don't forget that we recruited
people from the local population and trained them
under combat conditions and our troops weren't
that good either but it seemed like that we were
able to now in our camp we also had what was called We
were
supposed to advise them and they were supposed to
advise the soldiers, but actually we were—it was
the American money that paid for the soldiers that
were in our camp and we did most of the planning and
operations and so on. And they were more or less
intermediaries and—but they—most of the Wukong
Dai Bek were well-trained and well-disciplined
soldiers. I'd like to switch gears and talk a
little bit about your unit that you served with.
What was your feelings toward your unit? Well, we
were a maverick unit by the word go.
The superior corps of our unit was extremely high.
We
have a chapter here of the Spatial Forces
Association, the Alamo chapter. For example, how
our unit operated, we have two Medal of Honor
winners in our chapter. there's 88 members right
now. So, it's—our unit expected—it was expected
of us to have the—to do the best, and I would say
probably 99 percent of the time that's what was
given.
being you were a medic, did it make any difference
as far as your relations with the other guys? Or,
you know, was there any problems as far as them
cooperating with, you know, taking medicines and
stuff like this? Did that get in the way of your
friendship with them or the love for them or
anything? No. Of course, I had the responsibility
of the—approximately
of the team There was two medics there, and I was a
junior medic, but my senior medic did not like to
work in medicine, so it was all turned over to me,
which I was very happy with. And he was free to do
other duties, and he was more interested in
weapons. Now, someone who went over to Vietnam to
be what is called free-qualified, you had to be
qualified in three of the fields of the special
forces, which was, I was, my main qualification
was medic, and then they had communications,
weapons, demolition engineering, and
communications. And I was qualified in four,
which was intelligence, demolition, and
communications. Normally, when we went out on
patrol, two of us would go out together. In other
words, you covered each other's back. It didn't
matter which field you were in, when it was your
time to go out to patrol, you did. Of course, I
probably went out more than anybody else because A
lot of my work was also in what we commonly call
pacifications, civil affairs, or propaganda.
And I thought I was very good, and I used my medical
one, not only to help the people, but also in these
fields. And it ended up in an area, we went in and we
built a new camp which was 95 percent VC area. And I
was the only one that the people trusted, so I was
the one that set up all the local intelligence
there, because they would only talk to me. They
wouldn't talk to any other Americans. Well,
that's amazing. It was later in—I know you were
there in As the war went on in later years, the Army
came out with reports that there had been a few
problems in the Army of mainly fragging, drug
abuse, and self-inflicted wounds. Was there ever
any problems with this that you saw? Maybe not in
your unit, but maybe at all. No, none. One of the
guys on our team claimed to have migraine
headaches, and he wanted certain medication for
it, which was very strong medication.
I wouldn't give that unless he saw our doctor. See,
we had a doctor for each company, which is very
unusual, and a medical officer, a regular MD.
I felt like if he had that bad of headaches, he
should see somebody better than I was. And so I
would not give him the medicine. So an interesting
thing was that about every three months I had to
give the team shots. And one of the shots was
gamglobium, 10 cc's, which is a big shot. And you
only can give 5 cc in each cheek of the butt. And to
get around the argument of that, I called in, I
would take the shots over to my CO and tell him it was
time for shots and drop his drawers. And he would
butt around and I would inform him that I was the one
that was in charge of the medical thing and he
better do it. And so he did. Then after he got the
shots, I asked him to get the rest of the team
together and it was no problem. In fact, they used
to draw straws who gave me my shots. I imagine they
all enjoyed that. Yes. But we had about four or five
qualified medics in the team, so it was not
only—our
team count the young team, the average age was
twenty-three, but in the team they already had
fourteen missions in Vietnam.
But it was an experienced team.
What was your impressions of other units?
When you say other units, that covers a whole
gamut. Well,
just other units maybe within the 5th Special
Forces that you dealt with that you were in contact
with. Well, the 5th Special Forces had several
different specialized units. One of them was the
Mike Force, which was—they were to go into areas
like when a camp was being overrun and try to save it
and things like this. Or if they got some good
intelligence to lay a trap for a large body of a Viet
Cong. These were extremely outstanding units.
And then they had recon units that were also
extremely good.
what they went through for the physical and
endurance and what they did was exceptional. A lot
of people won't admit it, but I know there was—we
even had teams that was in North Vietnam.
So it seems like they had it run down by specialties
very much. Yes, I would say like the Mike Force and
these recon units and so on, that they were the
elite of the special forces.
I can't say how much—I don't think I could have made
one of those units. I wasn't physically strong
enough or my endurance wasn't enough to go into it.
What was your impressions of the higher command
and higher echelons?
I think as time goes on I'll find out that this was a
political war and conventional soldiers should
have never went into Vietnam. My feeling is that,
and the main idea The main feeling that I knew of the
Special Forces, most of the people in there, felt
like, first of all, they should leave it to units
like the Special Forces to help the people there.
But to do that, what we had to have was massive land
reforms and to let the local people own their own
land, and then they would be very willing to defend
it And if this happened, I think it would have been a
free country now. And instead of going in there
with the massive—and then too, the other thing
they did wrong was search and destroy, which was
just extremely wasteful. They did not avoid
taking hold in areas and You could never find
everything that was an area when you went in there
for search and destroy. I'd like to shift gears
just a little bit now and have a little background
on your unit and talk about your first encounter
with the enemy. What was your thoughts and
reactions when you first—your first
confrontation with him? I don't even remember. It
just happened. Yeah.
With the training we had, it just happened. We were
so well trained that you did things
automatically.
I would like to put into something about the medics
of the Spatial Forces. Three classes I went
through—the class before mine, my class, and the
class behind me—I believe I'm the only survivor of
the classes. And that's how great of casualties
the medics had because when somebody got hit, they
went and got them. And that was part of our
training. Did it without hesitation or without
thought? That's right. What were, as the war went
on, what was the causes of most of the injuries?
About seventy percent were from booby traps and
mines and things like this. And the Viet Cong would
put these indiscriminately over certain areas.
We also used the advantage—I know one village was
around the Cambodian border that we never were
able to get into that we knew was a Viet Cong depot
because they had a two-lane paved highway coming
in from Cambodia and stopped right there at And
this is where the Kaikai River went south toward
Saigon and didn't take anybody with any great
imagination why the road stopped there, right
there at the river. And about a K and a half or about a
mile inside the border, we built our camp right on
the banks of the Kaikai River to stop the
infiltration. And we were not liked very well by
the Viet Cong for doing this. In
a confrontation, how was it decided as far as what
injuries were treated given top priority or was
there any of this sort of thing?
Probably the worst
uh, action we had, I had, uh, 16 seriously or
critically wounded and which I evacuated eight of
them, uh, to, to the hospitals and, uh, all 16 I was,
I was treating or, or I got, they, uh, they got to me
alive or I got to them and none of them died until
after I reached the hospital. And the priority was
I was able to handle that Maine. And it was sort of an
interesting thing. I have open-handed policy
about medical treatment. I would treat anybody
and no questions asked. And I know I treated a lot of
Viet Cong when they thought they could not save
their life, they brought them to me. And I know it.
But I treated them and the majority of them did die.
And they were just too far gone, there was nothing
you could do. But this, to point out something
else, the respect that the enemy had of me, I had a
twenty-five thousand dollar bounty on my head.
And at that time the airplane pilots only had ten
thousand, so if you count how good a job you did by
what your enemy thought of you, you can use that as a
yardstick.
What was the extent of the treatment in the field?
Well,
there was two diseases that I could not treat, and
that was TB and leprosy.
On the whole, I was told that I should not enter any
of the three major cavities in surgery, and I did
not, but at one time I thought possibly I would have
to, because we had an American that came down with,
excuse
me, with either appendicitis or I diagnosed it as
penicillus and we were socked in from the weather
for four days and I treated him with antibiotics
for the four days and finally was able to evacuate
him out and when he got to the hospital he couldn't
find anything wrong with him so I um cured
appendicitis with the use of antibiotics. What
were the major diseases that you encountered?
Malaria was very prevalent. TB was also, and I
would say probably eighty percent or more of the
population had one or both. And the first week I was
at our first camp, which was Don Phuc, I had four
old—or five—I guess it was five old people die on me
from pneumonia. And the trouble was that when they
were brought to me, I could cure the pneumonia, but
they were so far down with the disease that their
body could not come back and they died because of
basically no nourishment and what the disease did
to their bodies. Was there any problems as far as
the American soldiers had adjusting to the
climate? Was there ever any heat stroke? Yes,
there was.
When you consider that during our wintertime,
which was a dry season, it probably never got under
90 degrees where we were, and
you really had to push the salt tablets and water
all the time. I know I was evacuated out of the area
three times for a year. combat exhaustion or, you
know, of a heat, and probably a combination of the
two. Most of the time when I was at the camp, I'd put
in anywhere from—an easy day would be sixteen or
eighteen hours. And this went for seven days a
week. And when you—the Americans normally pull
guard on the Americans, but we pulled guard on the
whole camp because inside our camp we figured at
least fifteen percent of our troops were Viet
Cong. And then we had daily operations and then
normally night ambushes that you went out for all
night and things like this. It really made some
long days. Was there any venereal disease at all? I
know a lot of armies in the past wars have had
problems with this. No, most venereal diseases
were in the larger seas. In Saigon. Mm-hmm. As far
as having an intimate relationship with any of the
local population, that was a very strict no-no,
and none of our team did. Mm-hmm. Although at one
time I did have four nurses working under me and one
of the nurses would not hesitate to go out on two
weeks patrol with me and carry a weapon and
everything. I had some very good Vietnamese
nurses I trained or the people before me trained
and they were excellent. What sort of preventive
measures were there for like malaria? We took some
pills once a week that was supposed to prevent
malaria. As far as I know, none of my team came down
with malaria. But you could not prevent malaria in
the local population. The only thing you could do
is treat it when it came up. How did you treat it?
With different kinds of medication. Okay. You had
said that you had an open-door policy. What was the
amount of patients that you treated, the
doctor-to-patient ratio? Well,
like I said before, I felt like our main object of
going into Vietnam was to be teachers. Anytime I
found somebody who was interested in medicine, I
grabbed ahold of them and made a medic or a nurse out
of them and taught them as much as I could. And I
would say for approximately the eleven months I
was there, sometimes
with sending out different groups for sick call,
in other words, a nurse would go out and have a sick
call, maybe half a mile away from the village and so
on, that sometimes I would have up to my medical
teams and I would see up to 500 people a day for sick
call. See, we were the only—I was the only modern
medicine in the whole province. It was
approximately 17,000 people in the province.
That is unbelievable. And then I had— the twelve
Americans and approximately six hundred
Vietnese soldiers that were there. But used them,
like I said before, used the medical field very
much as a weapon against the Viet Cong. If you want
me to expand on that? Yeah, if you would. At this one
village up close to the Cambodian One day we went up
there with our idea in hand and about three hundred
yards from the village I set up a sick call station.
And when the word got to the village I started
seeing people from the village there. And it
wasn't very—about half an hour later or so on that
Viacom came down there in force with the idea to
drive us out. And of course we retreated back
towards the camp and we knew there was the field
right next to the river there was full of mines. So
we had to stay behind ambush. That's why it is that
when I was there they got in position and we walked
right through them and when the Viet Cong came they
opened up on and drove him into the minefield and we
could hear some mines going on and so we went back
and